---
layout: post
title: "FBProphet"
published: false
categories: [ml, time_series]
---

> [Prophet](https://facebook.github.io/prophet/) is a procedure for **forecasting time series data based on an additive model** where non-linear trends are fit with yearly, weekly, and daily seasonality, plus holiday effects. It **works best** with time series that have **strong seasonal effects** and several seasons of historical data. Prophet is **robust to missing data and shifts in the trend**, and typically handles outliers well.



### [Trend Changepoints](https://facebook.github.io/prophet/docs/trend_changepoints.html)
> By default, Prophet will automatically detect these changepoints and will allow the trend to adapt appropriately.
However, if you wish to have finer control over this process, then there are several input arguments you can use.

#### Automatic changepoint detection in Prophet
> Prophet detects changepoints by first specifying a large number of potential changepoints at which the rate is allowed to change.

```Python
# Python
from fbprophet.plot import add_changepoints_to_plot
fig = m.plot(forecast)
a = add_changepoints_to_plot(fig.gca(), m, forecast)
```

* By default, Prophet specifies **25 potential changepoints**
* By default **changepoints** are only inferred for the first 80% of the time series
* We have a lot of places where the rate can possibly change
* Most of these changepoints go unused
* `n_changepoints`  set number of potential changepoints, but this is better tuned by adjusting the regularization.
* `changepoint_range`   For example, `m = Prophet(changepoint_range=0.9)` in Python

#### Adjusting trend flexibility
> If the trend changes are being overfit (too much flexibility) or underfit (not enough flexibility), you can adjust the strength of the sparse prior using the input argument changepoint_prior_scale. **Increasing** it will make the trend **more** flexible:

```Python
# Python
m = Prophet(changepoint_prior_scale=0.5)
forecast = m.fit(df).predict(future)
fig = m.plot(forecast)
```

### [Seasonality, Holiday Effects, And Regressors](https://facebook.github.io/prophet/docs/seasonality,_holiday_effects,_and_regressors.html)

#### Built-in Country Holidays
> You can use a built-in collection of country-specific holidays using the `add_country_holidays` method

```Python
# Python
m = Prophet(holidays=holidays)
m.add_country_holidays(country_name='US')
m.fit(df)
```

### Fourier Order for Seasonalities
> Seasonalities are estimated using a partial Fourier sum. See [the paper](https://peerj.com/preprints/3190/) for complete details, and [this figure on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fourier_series#/media/File:Fourier_Series.svg) for an illustration of how a partial Fourier sum can approximate an aribtrary **periodic signal**.

> The default **Fourier order** for yearly seasonality is `10`. The default values are often appropriate, but they can be **increased when the seasonality needs to fit higher-frequency changes**, and generally be less smooth.

```Python
# Python
from fbprophet.plot import plot_yearly
m = Prophet(yearly_seasonality=20).fit(df)
a = plot_yearly(m)
```

#### Specifying Custom Seasonalities
> Prophet will by default fit **weekly and yearly** seasonalities, if the time series is more than two cycles long. It will also fit **daily seasonality** for a sub-daily time series.

`add_seasonality` : add other seasonalities (monthly, quarterly, hourly) The inputs to this function are a `name`, the `period` of the seasonality in days, and the `Fourier order` for the seasonality.

```Python
# Python
m = Prophet(weekly_seasonality=False)
m.add_seasonality(name='monthly', period=30.5, fourier_order=5)
forecast = m.fit(df).predict(future)
fig = m.plot_components(forecast)
```

#### Prior scale for holidays and seasonality
> If you find that the holidays are **overfitting**, you can adjust their prior scale to smooth them using the parameter `holidays_prior_scale`. By default this parameter is 10, which provides very little regularization. Reducing this parameter dampens holiday effects . Prior scales can be set separately for individual holidays by including a column `prior_scale` in the holidays dataframe.


### [Multiplicative Seasonality](https://facebook.github.io/prophet/docs/multiplicative_seasonality.html)
> By default **Prophet fits additive seasonalities**, meaning the effect of the seasonality is added to the trend to get the forecast.

**Additive models** : the different components affected the time series additively.
```
Data = Seasonal effect + Trend + Cyclical + Residual
```

**Multiplicative model** : Assuming that the seasonal and other effects act proportionally on the series
```
Data = (Seasonal effect) * Trend * Cyclical * Residual
```

Multiplicative models are equally easy to fit to data as Additive models, take logarithms of both sides of the model
```
log(Data)   = log(SeasonalEffect * Trend * Cyclical * Residual)
            = log(SeasonalEffect) + log(Trend) + log(Cyclical) + log(Residual)
```

**To fit a multiplicative model, take logarithms of the data, then analyse the log data as before.**

 we use multiplicative models when the magnitude of the seasonal pattern in the data depends on the magnitude of the data. On other hand, in the additive model, the magnitude of seasonality does not change in relation to time.

Sometime additive seasonality does not work. Prophet can model multiplicative seasonality by setting `seasonality_mode='multiplicative'` in the input arguments:

```Python
# Python
m = Prophet(seasonality_mode='multiplicative')
m.fit(df)
forecast = m.predict(future)
fig = m.plot(forecast)
```

### [Uncertainty Intervals](https://facebook.github.io/prophet/docs/uncertainty_intervals.html)
> By default Prophet will **return uncertainty intervals** for the forecast `yhat`. There are several important assumptions behind these uncertainty intervals.

#### Uncertainty in the trend
> The biggest source of uncertainty in the forecast is the potential for **future trend changes**. It’s impossible to know for sure, so we do the most reasonable thing we can, and we assume that the `future will see similar trend changes as the history`.

The width of the uncertainty intervals (by default 80%) can be set using the parameter `interval_width`:

```Python
# Python
forecast = Prophet(interval_width=0.95).fit(df).predict(future)
```

#### Uncertainty in seasonality
> By default Prophet will **only return uncertainty in the trend and observation noise**. To get `uncertainty in seasonality`, you must do full **Bayesian sampling**. This is done using the parameter `mcmc_samples` (which defaults to 0).

```Python
# Python
m = Prophet(mcmc_samples=300)
forecast = m.fit(df).predict(future)
```
This replaces the typical **Maximum a Posteriori (MAP)** estimation with **Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)** sampling.
You can access the raw posterior predictive samples in Python using the method `m.predictive_samples(future)`
